Hello and welcome to this big history course.
My name is Esther Quaedackers and I will be
your main instructor.
I will not teach this course alone though.
Some of the most prominent astronomers, physicists,
geologist, biologist, paleontologist, neuroscientist,
historians, sociologists, economist and information
scientists from the University of Amsterdam
and beyond will join me, and together we will
give you an integrated overview of all of
history from the Big Bang up until life as
we know it today.
But before we will start giving you such an
overview I will briefly like to reflect on
that task.
Because how do you summarize 13.8 billion
years in one brief course?
Obviously, it is impossible to describe everything.
That would take a lot longer than 13.8 billion
years.
So you have to focus on some things, while
leaving most things out.
And this raises a very fundamental question:
how do you decide what you focus on and what
you leave out?
There are many ways to answer this question,
and I want to encourage you to develop your
own personal answer during this course.
But in order to do so, it might be useful
to learn a bit more about how big historians
around the world are dealing with this question
first.
Some big historians approach big history as
a story.
These big historians, who are often based
in the humanities departments, focus on things
that intuitively feel most important, for
instance things that raise a sense of wonder,
are awe inspiring or thought-provoking, and
fuse these things together into a an appealing
narrative.
The end result of this approach is a story
about our past that is in some way similar
to older creation stories such as Dreamtime
tales, the Mayan Popol Vuh or
Genesis.
A big history story is similar to these other
stories in a sense that it reflects the questions,
the fears and the dreams that are most important
to the people who create and share the story.
But there's also a big difference between
big history and older creation stories.
In contrast to these older stories, big history
is firmly based on the latest scientific and
scholarly ideas.
So even if in this approach there's quite
a lot of room for subjective and even artistic
ways to compile the story, there's no room
to temper with the scientific and scholarly
ideas that from the basic building blocks
of the story.
Other big historians, quite often those based
in science departments, use a different approach.
They construct big history theories.
They focus on the underlying patterns in big
history and on the things that might be able
to support or refute ideas about these patterns,
much like for instance, Big Bang cosmology,
plate tectonics and the theory of evolution
do.
Like cosmologists, geologists, and evolutionary
biologists, these bigger stories do not try
to describe every star, rock or living being.
Instead, they try to describe the general
mechanism that can lead to the emergence of
large numbers and varieties of stars, rocks,
living beings, and even human societies.
A third approach, first developed by my colleague
Jonathan Markley and me, falls somewhere in
between the big history stories and the big
history theories.
It consists of writing little big histories,
in which you take a relatively small subject
and link that to aspects of all major phases
in big history ,in order to generate some
new questions and ideas about the subject.
This approach is bit more structured and systematic
than the big history story approach, and a
bit more personal and concrete than a big
history theory approach, and is therefore
ideal for smaller research projects such as
Ph.D. projects or student assignments.
These three approaches will be represented
in this course in different ways.
I will open all modules, except the first
and the last one, with an overview of a specific
phase in big history, and I will base that
overview on what is currently the most prominent
big history theory.
Next, renowned guest lectures will build on
this overview by adding details they, our
university, and our society feel are most
important, and together they
will tell an inspiring creation story, naturally
one based on the latest scientific and scholarly
ideas.
I will conclude all modules, again except
for the first and the last one, by providing
some examples of little big history connections,
and while doing so I will
challenge you to do the same yourself in a
little big history assignment you will have
to complete in order to pass this course.
I will tell you a bit more about this assignment
in a subsequent video.
So, during this course you will be able to
familiarize yourself with various answers
to the question how to summarize 13.8 billion
years in a limited amount of
space and time, and perhaps come up with a
new answer yourself.
And as a result, while taking this big history
course, you'll not only gain a better understanding
of how you and all the things around you have
become the way they are, but you will also
learn to reflect what you think has been important
in the past, and based on that what you think
is important in the presence, and what will
be important in the future.